keps/sig-instrumentation/0034-distributed-tracing-kep.md, before:

---
title: Leveraging Distributed Tracing to Understand Kubernetes Object Lifecycles
authors:
  - "@Monkeyanator"
editors:
  - "@dashpole"
owning-sig: sig-instrumentation
participating-sigs:
  - sig-architecture
  - sig-node
  - sig-api-machinery
reviewers:
  - "@Random-Liu"
  - "@bogdandrutu"
approvers:
  - "@brancz"
  - "@piosz"
creation-date: 2018-12-04
last-updated: 2019-09-05
status: provisional
---

# Leveraging Distributed Tracing to Understand Kubernetes Object Lifecycles

## Table of Contents

- [Leveraging Distributed Tracing to Understand Kubernetes Object Lifecycles](#leveraging-distributed-tracing-to-understand-kubernetes-object-lifecycles)
    - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
    - [Summary](#summary)
    - [Motivation](#motivation)
        - [Definitions](#definitions)
        - [Goals](#goals)
        - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
    - [Proposal](#proposal)
        - [Architecture](#architecture)
            - [Tracing API Requests](#tracing-api-requests)
            - [Propagating Traces Through Objects](#propagating-context-through-objects)
            - [Controller Behavior](#controller-behavior)          
            - [End-User Behavior](#end-user-behavior)          
        - [In-tree changes](#in-tree-changes)
            - [Vendor the Tracing Framework](#vendor-the-tracing-framework)
            - [Trace Utility Package](#trace-utility-package)
            - [Tracing Pod Lifecycle](#tracing-pod-lifecycle)
        - [Out-of-tree changes](#out-of-tree-changes)
            - [Tracing best-practices documentation](#tracing-best-practices-documentation)
            - [Mutating admission webhook](#mutating-admission-webhook)
    - [Graduation Requirements](#graduation-requirements)
    - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Summary

This Kubernetes Enhancement Proposal (KEP) introduces a model for adding distributed tracing to Kubernetes object lifecycles. The inclusion of this trace instrumentation will mark a significant step in making Kubernetes processes more observable, understandable, and debuggable.


## Motivation

Debugging latency issues in Kubernetes is an involved process. There are existing tools which can be used to isolate these issues in Kubernetes, but these methods fall short for various reasons. For instance:

* **Logs**: are fragmented, and finding out which process was the bottleneck involves digging through troves of unstructured text. In addition, logs do not offer higher-level insight into overall system behavior without an extensive background on the process of interest. 
* **Events**: in Kubernetes are only kept for an hour by default, and don't integrate with visualization of analysis tools. To gain trace-like insights would require a large investment in custom tooling.
* **Latency metrics**: can only supply limited metadata because of cardinality constraints.  They are useful for showing _that_ a process was slow, but don't provide insight into _why_ it was slow.  

Distributed tracing provides a single window into latency information from across many components and plugins. Trace data is structured, and there are numerous established backends for visualizing and querying over it.

### Definitions

**Span**: The smallest unit of a trace.  It has a start and end time, and is attached to a single trace.
**Trace**: A collection of Spans which represents a single process.
**Trace Context**: A reference to a Trace that is designed to be propagated across component boundaries.

### Goals

* Make it possible to visualize the progress of objects across distinct Kubernetes components
* Streamline the tedious processes involved in debugging latency issues in Kubernetes
* Make it possible to identify high-level latency regressions, and attribute them back to offending processes


### Non-Goals

* Replace existing logging, metrics, or the events API
* Trace operations from all Kubernetes resource types in a generic manner (i.e. without manual instrumentation)

## Proposal

### Architecture

#### Tracing API Requests

In the traditional tracing model, a client sends a request to a server and recieves a response back.  Even though Kubernetes "controllers" don't follow this model (more on that later), the kube-apierver and backing storage (e.g. etcd3) do.  To enable traces to be collected for API requests, the following must be true:

1. The apiserver must propagate the http context of incoming requests through its function stack to the backing storage
1. Kubernetes client libraries must allow passing a context with API requests

To actually add traces to API requests, owners of the kube-apiserver and backing storage may add Spans to incoming requests, and configure sampling as they see fit.

#### Propagating Context Through Objects

While API requests follow the traditional RPC client-server tracing model, kubernetes controllers don't.  Instead of controller actions being driven by incoming RPCs, their actions are driven by observations of desired and actual state.  This is the primary reason why the kubernetes community hasn't agreed on how to integrate tracing into kubernetes thus far.

In the traditional RPC client-server tracing model, a trace context is attached to a single incoming request, and is propagated with all requests the server makes to other servers required to fulfill the initial single request.  Conceptually, this proposal suggests treating a kubernetes cluster as a single RPC server.  The difference is that we attach context to objects, and propagate this context to objects modified as a result of the initial object modification.  For example, if a user creates a ReplicaSet, the kube-controller-manager will create many Pod objects as a result, and will propagate the context used to create the ReplicaSet to Pod objects as well.  This ensures that all actions taken by kubernetes controllers as a result of the initial user action are linked by the same context.

For the alpha phase, we choose to propagate this span context as an encoded string an object annotation called `trace.kubernetes.io/context`.  As noted in [Tracing API Requests](#tracing-api-requests) above, storing the trace context with the context is _in addition_ to attaching a context to http requests to the apiserver.  The reason for this is explained in the [Controller Behavior](#controller-behavior) section below.  In some scenarios, controllers will want to update the trace context from A -> B, but want to associated that Update request with context A.


This annotation value is regenerated and replaced when an object's trace ends, to achieve the desired behavior from [section one](#trace-lifecycle). 

This proposal chooses to use annotations as a less invasive alternative to adding a field to object metadata, but as this proposal matures, we should consider graduating this 

Whenever possible, updates to the trace context should be performed in the same Update/Patch as other operations.  For alpha, it is permissible to update trace context with a seperate write if this is not easily feasible.  However, for this proposal to move to Beta, we must ensure tracing can be done without adding extra writes to the APIServer.

#### Controller Behavior

When reconciling an object `Foo` a Controller must:

1. Send the trace context stored in `Foo` in the http request context for all API requests. See [Tracing API Requests](#tracing-api-requests)
1. Store the trace context of `Foo` in object `Bar` when updating the Spec of `Bar`. See [Propagating Context Through Objects](#propagating-context-through-objects)
1. Export a span around work that attempts to drive the actual state of an object towards its desired state
1. Replace the trace context of `Foo` when updating `Foo`'s status to the desired state

Controllers must _only_ export Spans around work that it is correcting from an undesired state to its desired state.  To avoid exporting pointless spans, controllers must not export spans around reconciliation loops that do not perform actual work.  For example, the kubelet must not export a span around syncPod, which is a generic Reconcile function.  Instead, it should export spans around CreateContainer, or other functions that move the system towards its desired state. 

This proposal is grounded on the principle that a trace context is attached to and propagated with end-user intent.  When the status of an object is updated to its desired state, the end-user's intent for that object has been fulfilled.  Controllers must "end" tracing for an object when it reaches its desired state.  To accomplish this, Controllers must update the trace context of an object when updating the status of an object from an undesired to a desired state.  For objects that report a status that can reach a desired state, this limits traces to just the actions taken by controllers in the fulfillment of the end-user's intent, and prevents traces from spanning an indefinite period of time.

Components should plumb the context through reconciliation functions, rather than storing and looking up trace contexts globally so that each attempt to reconcile desired and actual state uses the context associated with _that_ desired state through the entire attempt.  If multiple components are involved in reconciling a single object, one may act on the new trace context before the other, but each trace is still representative of the work done to reconcile to the corresponding desired state. Given this model, we guarantee that each trace contains the actions taken to reconcile toward a single desired state.

High-level processes, such as starting a pod or restarting a failed container, could be interrupted before completion by an update to the desired state. While this leaves a "partial" trace for the first process, it is the most accurate representation of the work and timing of reconciling desired and actual state.

#### End-User Behavior

A previous iteration of this proposal suggested controllers should export a "Root Span" when ending a trace (described in [Controller Behavior](#controller-behavior) above).  However, that would limit a trace to being associated with a single object, since a "Root Span" defines the scope of the trace.  More generally, we shouldn't assume that the creation or update of a single object represents the entirety of end-user intent.  The user or system using kubernetes determines what the user intent is, not kubernetes controllers.

Tracing in a kubernetes cluster must be a composable component within a larger system, and allow external users or systems to define the "Root Span" that defines and bounds the scope of a trace.

For example, a user could define a Pod Creation trace doing something like the following:
```golang
ctx, span := trace.StartSpan(context.Background(), “create-my-pod”)
defer span.End()
ctx = traceutil.WithSpanContext(ctx, span)
pod, err := c.CoreV1().Pod(myPod.Namespace).Create(ctx, myPod)
if err != nil {
    return err
}
waitForPodToBeRunning(ctx, myPod)
return nil
```

### In-tree changes

#### Vendor the Tracing Framework

This KEP proposes the use of the [OpenTelemetry tracing framework](https://opentelemetry.io/) to create and export spans to configured backends. However, this framework is still under development.  During the alpha phase, we will use [OpenCensus](https://opencensus.io/), which promises to be compatible with opentelemetry when it is released. 

While in alpha, controllers should use the OpenCensus exporter, which exports traces to the [OpenCensus Agent](https://github.com/census-instrumentation/opencensus-service). The OpenCensus agent allows importing and configuring exporters for trace storage backends to be done out-of-tree in addition to other useful features.

This KEP suggests that we utilize the OpenCensus agent for the initial implementation to reduce the global changes required for alpha.  Alternative options include:

1. Add configuration for exporters in-tree by vendoring in each "supported" exporter. 
  a. This places the kubernetes community in the position of curating supported tracing backends
  b. This eliminates the requirement to run to OpenCensus agent in order to use tracing
2) Support *both* a curated set of in-tree exporters, and the agent exporter

While this setup is suitable for an alpha stage, it will require further review from Sig-Instrumentation and Sig-Architecture for beta, as it introduces a dependency on the OC Agent.  It is also worth noting that OpenCensus still has many unresolved details on how to run the agent.

#### Trace Utility Package

This package will be able to create spans from the span context embedded in the `trace.kubernetes.io/context` object annotation, in addition to embedding context from spans back into the annotation. This package will facilitate tracing across Kubernetes watches. It will also provide an implementation for exporting the root span for a given reconciliation trace.

#### Tracing Pod Lifecycle

As we move forward with this KEP, we will use the aforementioned trace utility package to trace pod-related operations across the scheduler and kubelet. In code, this corresponds to creating a span (i.e. `ctx, span := trace.StartSpan(ctx, "Component.SampleSpan")`) at the beginning of an operation, and ending the span afterwards (`span.End()`). All calls to tracing functions will be gated with the `ObjectLifecycleTracing` alpha feature-gate, and will be disabled by default.

OpenCensus ships with plugins to transport trace context across gRPC and HTTP boundaries, which enables us to extend our tracing across the CRI and other internal boundaries.

In OpenCensus' Go implementation, span context is passed down through Go context. This will necessitate the threading of context across more of the Kubernetes codebase, which is a [desired outcome regardless](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/815).

While adding tracing to Pods is a good first step to demonstrate the viability of object lifecycle tracing in kubernetes, we expect component owners to add tracing to their components in an ad-hoc fashion.

### Out-of-tree changes

#### Tracing best-practices documentation

This KEP introduces a new form of instrumentation to Kubernetes, which necessiates the creation of guidelines for adding effective, standardized traces to Kubernetes components, [similar to what is found here for metrics](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/instrumentation.md).

This documentation will put forward standards for: 

* How to name spans, attributes, and annotations
* What kind of processes should be wrapped in a span
* When to link spans to other traces
* What kind of data makes for useful attributes
* How to propagate trace context as proposed above

Having these standards in place will ensure that our tracing instrumentation works well with all backends, and that reviewers have concrete criteria to cross-check PRs against. 

#### Mutating admission webhook

For spans to be correlated as part of the same trace, we must generate a `span context`, serialize it, and embed it in target traced objects. To accomplish this, we have introduced an [out-of-tree mutating admission webhook](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/mutating-trace-admission-controller).

This mutating admission webhook generates a `span context`, which is the base64 encoded version of [this wire format](https://github.com/census-instrumentation/opencensus-specs/blob/master/encodings/BinaryEncoding.md#trace-context), and embeds it into the `trace.kubernetes.io/context` object annotation. The webhook can be configured to inject context into only target object types.

The decision on whether or not to sample traces from a given object is made in this webhook, upon the generation of the trace context. In addition to this, the aforementioned OpenCensus agent offers ex-post-facto trace sampling.

The proposed in-tree changes will utilize the span context annotation injected into objects with this webhook.

When this feature moves to beta, we should move this defaulting logic in-tree to either the client library or to defaulting in the APIServer.

### Graduation requirements

Alpha

- [] Alpha-implementation as described above
- [] E2e testing of traces
- [] User-facing documentation

Beta

- [] Security Review, including threat model
- [] Tracing must not increase the number of requests to the APIServer
- [] Deployment review including whether the [OC Agent](https://github.com/census-instrumentation/opencensus-service#opencensus-agent) is a required component
- [] Benchmark kubernetes components using tracing, and determine resource requirements and scaling for any additional required components (e.g. OC Agent).
- [] Move trace context creation in-tree, and remove the need for an admission webhook.

GA

## Implementation History

* [Mutating admission webhook which injects trace context](https://github.com/Monkeyanator/mutating-trace-admission-controller)
* [Instrumentation of Kubernetes components](https://github.com/Monkeyanator/kubernetes/pull/15)
* [Instrumentation of Kubernetes components for 1/24/2019 community demo](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/compare/master...dashpole:tracing)

Commit message:

add latency logging section and trace context size

keps/sig-instrumentation/0034-distributed-tracing-kep.md, after:

---
title: Leveraging Distributed Tracing to Understand Kubernetes Object Lifecycles
authors:
  - "@Monkeyanator"
editors:
  - "@dashpole"
owning-sig: sig-instrumentation
participating-sigs:
  - sig-architecture
  - sig-node
  - sig-api-machinery
  - sig-scalability
reviewers:
  - "@Random-Liu"
  - "@bogdandrutu"
approvers:
  - "@brancz"
  - "@piosz"
creation-date: 2018-12-04
last-updated: 2019-09-05
status: provisional
---

# Leveraging Distributed Tracing to Understand Kubernetes Object Lifecycles

## Table of Contents

- [Leveraging Distributed Tracing to Understand Kubernetes Object Lifecycles](#leveraging-distributed-tracing-to-understand-kubernetes-object-lifecycles)
    - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
    - [Summary](#summary)
    - [Motivation](#motivation)
        - [Definitions](#definitions)
        - [Goals](#goals)
        - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
    - [Proposal](#proposal)
        - [Architecture](#architecture)
            - [Tracing API Requests](#tracing-api-requests)
            - [Propagating Traces Through Objects](#propagating-context-through-objects)
            - [Controller Behavior](#controller-behavior)          
            - [End-User Behavior](#end-user-behavior)          
        - [In-tree changes](#in-tree-changes)
            - [Vendor the Tracing Framework](#vendor-the-tracing-framework)
            - [Trace Utility Package](#trace-utility-package)
            - [Tracing Pod Lifecycle](#tracing-pod-lifecycle)
        - [Out-of-tree changes](#out-of-tree-changes)
            - [Tracing best-practices documentation](#tracing-best-practices-documentation)
            - [Mutating admission webhook](#mutating-admission-webhook)
    - [Graduation Requirements](#graduation-requirements)
    - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Summary

This Kubernetes Enhancement Proposal (KEP) introduces a model for adding distributed tracing to Kubernetes object lifecycles. The inclusion of this trace instrumentation will mark a significant step in making Kubernetes processes more observable, understandable, and debuggable.


## Motivation

Debugging latency issues in Kubernetes is an involved process. There are existing tools which can be used to isolate these issues in Kubernetes, but these methods fall short for various reasons. For instance:

* **Logs**: are fragmented, and finding out which process was the bottleneck involves digging through troves of unstructured text. In addition, logs do not offer higher-level insight into overall system behavior without an extensive background on the process of interest. 
* **Events**: in Kubernetes are only kept for an hour by default, and don't integrate with visualization of analysis tools. To gain trace-like insights would require a large investment in custom tooling.
* **Latency metrics**: can only supply limited metadata because of cardinality constraints.  They are useful for showing _that_ a process was slow, but don't provide insight into _why_ it was slow.
* **Latency Logging**: is a "poor man's" version of tracing that only works within a single binary and outputs log messages.  See [github.com/kubernetes/utils/trace](https://github.com/kubernetes/utils/tree/master/trace).

Distributed tracing provides a single window into latency information from across many components and plugins. Trace data is structured, and there are numerous established backends for visualizing and querying over it.

### Definitions

**Span**: The smallest unit of a trace.  It has a start and end time, and is attached to a single trace.
**Trace**: A collection of Spans which represents a single process.
**Trace Context**: A reference to a Trace that is designed to be propagated across component boundaries.

### Goals

* Make it possible to visualize the progress of objects across distinct Kubernetes components
* Streamline the tedious processes involved in debugging latency issues in Kubernetes
* Make it possible to identify high-level latency regressions, and attribute them back to offending processes


### Non-Goals

* Replace existing logging, metrics, or the events API
* Trace operations from all Kubernetes resource types in a generic manner (i.e. without manual instrumentation)

## Proposal

### Architecture

#### Tracing API Requests

In the traditional tracing model, a client sends a request to a server and recieves a response back.  Even though Kubernetes "controllers" don't follow this model (more on that later), the kube-apierver and backing storage (e.g. etcd3) do.  To enable traces to be collected for API requests, the following must be true:

1. The apiserver must propagate the http context of incoming requests through its function stack to the backing storage
1. Kubernetes client libraries must allow passing a context with API requests

To actually add traces to API requests, owners of the kube-apiserver and backing storage may add Spans to incoming requests, and configure sampling as they see fit.

#### Propagating Context Through Objects

While API requests follow the traditional RPC client-server tracing model, kubernetes controllers don't.  Instead of controller actions being driven by incoming RPCs, their actions are driven by observations of desired and actual state.  This is the primary reason why the kubernetes community hasn't agreed on how to integrate tracing into kubernetes thus far.

In the traditional RPC client-server tracing model, a trace context is attached to a single incoming request, and is propagated with all requests the server makes to other servers required to fulfill the initial single request.  Conceptually, this proposal suggests treating a kubernetes cluster as a single RPC server.  The difference is that we attach context to objects, and propagate this context to objects modified as a result of the initial object modification.  For example, if a user creates a ReplicaSet, the kube-controller-manager will create many Pod objects as a result, and will propagate the context used to create the ReplicaSet to Pod objects as well.  This ensures that all actions taken by kubernetes controllers as a result of the initial user action are linked by the same context.

For the alpha phase, we choose to propagate this span context as an encoded string an object annotation called `trace.kubernetes.io/context`.  As noted in [Tracing API Requests](#tracing-api-requests) above, storing the trace context with the context is _in addition_ to attaching a context to http requests to the apiserver.  The reason for this is explained in the [Controller Behavior](#controller-behavior) section below.  In some scenarios, controllers will want to update the trace context from A -> B, but want to associated that Update request with context A.

This means two trace contexts are sent in different forms with Create/Patch/Update requests to the apiserver.  A trace context is around 32 bytes (16 bytes for the trace ID, 8 bytes for the span ID, and some metadata). See the [OpenCensus spec](https://github.com/census-instrumentation/opencensus-specs/blob/master/trace/Span.md#spancontext) and  the [w3c spec](https://w3c.github.io/trace-context/#tracestate-field) for details.


This annotation value is regenerated and replaced when an object's trace ends, to achieve the desired behavior from [section one](#trace-lifecycle). 

This proposal chooses to use annotations as a less invasive alternative to adding a field to object metadata, but as this proposal matures, we should consider graduating this 

Whenever possible, updates to the trace context should be performed in the same Update/Patch as other operations.  For alpha, it is permissible to update trace context with a seperate write if this is not easily feasible.  However, for this proposal to move to Beta, we must ensure tracing can be done without adding extra writes to the APIServer to ensure tracing does not affect scalability.

#### Controller Behavior

When reconciling an object `Foo` a Controller must:

1. Send the trace context stored in `Foo` in the http request context for all API requests. See [Tracing API Requests](#tracing-api-requests)
1. Store the trace context of `Foo` in object `Bar` when updating the Spec of `Bar`. See [Propagating Context Through Objects](#propagating-context-through-objects)
1. Export a span around work that attempts to drive the actual state of an object towards its desired state
1. Replace the trace context of `Foo` when updating `Foo`'s status to the desired state

Controllers must _only_ export Spans around work that it is correcting from an undesired state to its desired state.  To avoid exporting pointless spans, controllers must not export spans around reconciliation loops that do not perform actual work.  For example, the kubelet must not export a span around syncPod, which is a generic Reconcile function.  Instead, it should export spans around CreateContainer, or other functions that move the system towards its desired state. 

This proposal is grounded on the principle that a trace context is attached to and propagated with end-user intent.  When the status of an object is updated to its desired state, the end-user's intent for that object has been fulfilled.  Controllers must "end" tracing for an object when it reaches its desired state.  To accomplish this, Controllers must update the trace context of an object when updating the status of an object from an undesired to a desired state.  For objects that report a status that can reach a desired state, this limits traces to just the actions taken by controllers in the fulfillment of the end-user's intent, and prevents traces from spanning an indefinite period of time.

Components should plumb the context through reconciliation functions, rather than storing and looking up trace contexts globally so that each attempt to reconcile desired and actual state uses the context associated with _that_ desired state through the entire attempt.  If multiple components are involved in reconciling a single object, one may act on the new trace context before the other, but each trace is still representative of the work done to reconcile to the corresponding desired state. Given this model, we guarantee that each trace contains the actions taken to reconcile toward a single desired state.

High-level processes, such as starting a pod or restarting a failed container, could be interrupted before completion by an update to the desired state. While this leaves a "partial" trace for the first process, it is the most accurate representation of the work and timing of reconciling desired and actual state.

#### End-User Behavior

A previous iteration of this proposal suggested controllers should export a "Root Span" when ending a trace (described in [Controller Behavior](#controller-behavior) above).  However, that would limit a trace to being associated with a single object, since a "Root Span" defines the scope of the trace.  More generally, we shouldn't assume that the creation or update of a single object represents the entirety of end-user intent.  The user or system using kubernetes determines what the user intent is, not kubernetes controllers.

Tracing in a kubernetes cluster must be a composable component within a larger system, and allow external users or systems to define the "Root Span" that defines and bounds the scope of a trace.

For example, a user could define a Pod Creation trace doing something like the following:
```golang
ctx, span := trace.StartSpan(context.Background(), “create-my-pod”)
defer span.End()
ctx = traceutil.WithSpanContext(ctx, span)
pod, err := c.CoreV1().Pod(myPod.Namespace).Create(ctx, myPod)
if err != nil {
    return err
}
waitForPodToBeRunning(ctx, myPod)
return nil
```

### In-tree changes

#### Vendor the Tracing Framework

This KEP proposes the use of the [OpenTelemetry tracing framework](https://opentelemetry.io/) to create and export spans to configured backends. However, this framework is still under development.  During the alpha phase, we will use [OpenCensus](https://opencensus.io/), which promises to be compatible with opentelemetry when it is released. 

While in alpha, controllers should use the OpenCensus exporter, which exports traces to the [OpenCensus Agent](https://github.com/census-instrumentation/opencensus-service). The OpenCensus agent allows importing and configuring exporters for trace storage backends to be done out-of-tree in addition to other useful features.

This KEP suggests that we utilize the OpenCensus agent for the initial implementation to reduce the global changes required for alpha.  Alternative options include:

1. Add configuration for exporters in-tree by vendoring in each "supported" exporter. 
  a. This places the kubernetes community in the position of curating supported tracing backends
  b. This eliminates the requirement to run to OpenCensus agent in order to use tracing
2. Support *both* a curated set of in-tree exporters, and the agent exporter

While this setup is suitable for an alpha stage, it will require further review from Sig-Instrumentation and Sig-Architecture for beta, as it introduces a dependency on the OC Agent.  It is also worth noting that OpenCensus still has many unresolved details on how to run the agent.

#### Trace Utility Package

This package will be able to create spans from the span context embedded in the `trace.kubernetes.io/context` object annotation, in addition to embedding context from spans back into the annotation. This package will facilitate tracing across Kubernetes watches. It will also provide an implementation for exporting the root span for a given reconciliation trace.

#### Tracing Pod Lifecycle

As we move forward with this KEP, we will use the aforementioned trace utility package to trace pod-related operations across the scheduler and kubelet. In code, this corresponds to creating a span (i.e. `ctx, span := trace.StartSpan(ctx, "Component.SampleSpan")`) at the beginning of an operation, and ending the span afterwards (`span.End()`). All calls to tracing functions will be gated with the `ObjectLifecycleTracing` alpha feature-gate, and will be disabled by default.

OpenCensus ships with plugins to transport trace context across gRPC and HTTP boundaries, which enables us to extend our tracing across the CRI and other internal boundaries.

In OpenCensus' Go implementation, span context is passed down through Go context. This will necessitate the threading of context across more of the Kubernetes codebase, which is a [desired outcome regardless](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/815).

While adding tracing to Pods is a good first step to demonstrate the viability of object lifecycle tracing in kubernetes, we expect component owners to add tracing to their components in an ad-hoc fashion.

### Out-of-tree changes

#### Tracing best-practices documentation

This KEP introduces a new form of instrumentation to Kubernetes, which necessiates the creation of guidelines for adding effective, standardized traces to Kubernetes components, [similar to what is found here for metrics](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/instrumentation.md).

This documentation will put forward standards for: 

* How to name spans, attributes, and annotations
* What kind of processes should be wrapped in a span
* When to link spans to other traces
* What kind of data makes for useful attributes
* How to propagate trace context as proposed above

Having these standards in place will ensure that our tracing instrumentation works well with all backends, and that reviewers have concrete criteria to cross-check PRs against. 

#### Mutating admission webhook

For spans to be correlated as part of the same trace, we must generate a `span context`, serialize it, and embed it in target traced objects. To accomplish this, we have introduced an [out-of-tree mutating admission webhook](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/mutating-trace-admission-controller).

This mutating admission webhook generates a `span context`, which is the base64 encoded version of [this wire format](https://github.com/census-instrumentation/opencensus-specs/blob/master/encodings/BinaryEncoding.md#trace-context), and embeds it into the `trace.kubernetes.io/context` object annotation. The webhook can be configured to inject context into only target object types.

The decision on whether or not to sample traces from a given object is made in this webhook, upon the generation of the trace context. In addition to this, the aforementioned OpenCensus agent offers ex-post-facto trace sampling.

The proposed in-tree changes will utilize the span context annotation injected into objects with this webhook.

When this feature moves to beta, we should move this defaulting logic in-tree to either the client library or to defaulting in the APIServer.

### Graduation requirements

Alpha

- [] Alpha-implementation as described above
- [] E2e testing of traces
- [] User-facing documentation

Beta

- [] Security Review, including threat model
- [] Tracing must not increase the number of requests to the APIServer
- [] Deployment review including whether the [OC Agent](https://github.com/census-instrumentation/opencensus-service#opencensus-agent) is a required component
- [] Benchmark kubernetes components using tracing, and determine resource requirements and scaling for any additional required components (e.g. OC Agent).
- [] Move trace context creation in-tree, and remove the need for an admission webhook.

GA

## Implementation History

* [Mutating admission webhook which injects trace context](https://github.com/Monkeyanator/mutating-trace-admission-controller)
* [Instrumentation of Kubernetes components](https://github.com/Monkeyanator/kubernetes/pull/15)
* [Instrumentation of Kubernetes components for 1/24/2019 community demo](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/compare/master...dashpole:tracing)
